SPI:

Serial Peripheral Interface, often shortened as SPI, is a synchronous serial data transfer protocol named by Motorola. 
Here two or more serial devices are connected to each other in full-duplex mode. The devices connected to each other are either Master or Slave.
In a SPI link there could as many Masters and Slaves as required, but it’s very rare to find more than one Master in a SPI link.
This is a full-duplex connection, which means that Master can send data to Slave(s) and the Slave(s) can also send the data to the Master at the same time.

The SPI operation is based upon shift registers. Every device,whether Master or Slave has an 8-bit shift register inside it. 
The size of the shift register should be the same for both Master and Slave, and the protocol should support it.
SPI is a synchronous serial data transfer protocol, which means that there must be a clock to synchronize the data transfer.
We use the clock source of the Master device to synchronize the data transfer since Master is responsible for initiating the connection.

Transfer Operation:
- Both, Master and Slave place the data byte they wish to transfer in their respective shift registers before the communication starts.
- Master generates 8 clock pulses. After each clock pulse, one bit of information is transferred from Master to Slave and vice-versa.
- After 8 clock pulses, Master would have received Slave’s data, whereas Slave would have Master’s data, a full-duplex communication.

Master and Slave should agree on a particular synchronization protocol as well, or else everything will go wrong and data will get lost.

I2C:

I²C is a multi-master protocol that uses 2 signal lines. The two I²C signals are called ‘serial data’ (SDA) and
‘serial clock’ (SCL).It is asynchronous in nature. It can support upto 1008 slave devices and allows more than one master.
Each I2C bus consists of two signals: SCL and SDA. SCL is the clock signal, and SDA is the data signal.

Protocol
-Messages are broken up into two types of frame: an address frame and data frame. Data is placed on the SDA line after SCL goes low, and is sampled after the SCL line goes high.
-To initiate the address frame, the master device leaves SCL high and pulls SDA low. This puts all slave devices on notice that a transmission is about to start.
-The address frame is always first in any new communication sequence. For a 7-bit address, the address is clocked out most significant bit (MSB) first, followed by a R/W bit.
-Once all the data frames have been sent, the master will generate a stop condition.

Concluding, I2C and SPI are only intended for short distance communications between devices.
